[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> One of the more important
and forgotten aspects
of psychedelic experiences is
the shadow side of all people,
all events, and life itself.
The side of the
coin less involved
with profound visuals, "aha"
moments, and inner healing,
and more involved
with hidden aspects
of the psyche, misguided,
or under-educated use,
and even malicious intent.
Since the dawn of time,
it's in the shadows that
lurk the predators and blind
spots that have timelessly
intimidated humanity.
Some steer clear of the
darkness and keep safe.
Others use the dark to
cover their hidden agendas.
And a rare few venture into the
dark shadows to bring light.
A tool that has been used
since the dawn of art
and human expression to
illuminate the darkness
is the judicious use
of psychedelic plants.
But these plants
are tools that can
be used for the light, the dark,
and every gradient in-between.
So, what do psychedelic
researchers and experience
psychonauts suggest for
newcomers when considering
a plant-medicine experience?
>> I'm the faculty advisor for
the psychedelic club at Naropa
University, where I
teach herbal medicine.
And there's a concern
that a lot of young people
are taking these
substances and maybe
having a difficult or
dangerous experience.
And personally,
I think that when
you're doing these substances
at a concert with thousands
of people and very loud music
that may not have the highest
intentions, it might
be music that's
coming from a place of ego
and only junk food and alcohol
being served.
I see that as something
that's going to not give you
a deep personal experience.
>> For me, I try to avoid
festivals and concerts
in general when I'm
on psychedelics.
I don't think that I get a
lot of deep inner work done
when there's music blaring and
a light show and all of that.
It can be fun.
It's not that I
never do it, but it
can be a little overwhelming
for a lot of people, I think,
or just not productive.
>> And you have to choose if you
want to use the full potential
of psychedelics or if you want
to play kind of psychedelic
roulette.
People have taken it under a
lot of lousy circumstances,
of course.
The raves that people
go and get it--
they don't know what
they are taking,
how much they are taking.
They know they're doing
something illegal,
the police can come--
just a lousiest possible
setting I can imagine.
>> In the 1950s around London,
wild Bohemian parties called
the raves began popping
up in youth culture.
Their evolution moved
through the psychedelic craze
of the '60s.
And once the '80s rolled
around, drugs and dancing
became the mantra.
These raves have
been the setting
for many psychedelic
experiences gone wrong.
The music is typified
by monotonous drums
and catchy hooks that go
for extended amounts of time
to afford people long
soundscapes upon which
to dance.
Others claim it's a revival of
shamanic trance rhythms taught
to our elders by the plants.
Newer renditions of
these scenes seem
less interested in
community bonding and prayer
and more into
recreational drug use.
However, there is also a
resurgence of ceremony, prayer,
and oneness once you leave
the typical rave scene
and enter festivals like Burning
Man, Boom, Lucidity, Envision,
Spirit Weavers, and Symbiosis.
But as culture moves farther
away from our shamanic past,
the safe containers for
psychedelic journeys
are less understood
by our youth.
>> A couple of years ago, I
went to a Shpongle concert.
I was signing books.
It was in Austin.
And I smelled more DMT
coming from the dance floor
than I smelled pot.
So, afterwards, I asked Simon
Posford, one of the Shpongle
members, about that.
I said, well, I smelled more DMT
than marijuana from the floor.
Does that happen?
He said, yeah, it
seems to happen.
So, there's a lot of people
smoking DMT at dance events.
And I asked one kid that
I was signing a book for,
what was the deal
on the dance floor.
He described that you
would smoke a small amount
on the dance floor and it
would just kind of enhance
your sensory experience.
And if you wanted the
full-on DMT effect,
you would go outside,
or you stay along
the wall of the hall,
kind of out of the way.
>> Some believe that just as
our ancestors had no rulebook
for the responsible
use of psychedelics,
the youth today are finding
their own ways to explore
the depths of consciousness
while remaining in modern-style
gatherings.
But perhaps the
biggest difference
is traditional
ceremonies included
only those participants
that the shaman would allow.
Today, anyone with
any intention is just
a ticket fee and a few
travel arrangements
away from being in your space,
in your sphere of influence,
and therefore, in your
psychedelic journey.
But gathering together
for music, dance,
and psychedelic
journeys is not new.
In ancient Greece,
the Dionysia festivals
were a time for people to
gather, dance, and sing, even
perform plays and partake in
psychoactive herbs infused
in alcohol.
Across the Atlantic in
present-day Mexico City,
the Aztecs worshiped the
god of dance, pleasure, joy,
and psychoactive plants,
named Xochipilli.
It's hard to know how safe
the set and setting were
at these ancient festivals.
But we know they were highly
celebrated as opportunities
to depart from daily labor.
So, in these moments
when thousands of people
are unleashing their
day-to-day stressors
onto the same patch of
land, at the same time,
just like modern
music festivals,
is there more in the
air than meets the eye?
Modern-day regression
therapist and healer,
Marion Boon explains the dangers
of uncontained ceremonies.
>> What I do as an
advanced-regression therapist
is postmodern shamanism,
because we are doing, in fact,
similar of the shaman approach.
But we teach our client to go
there under the right guidance.
So, when I'm opening up
at a trance festival,
and thousands of people
are doing the same,
and we go trance,
trance and open up,
there is always some
shadow that can enter.
And when you are
hurt inside, you
will attract a similar kind
of hurt from somebody else.
That is seen as darkness.
That is seen as shadow.
So, to work with this is
what ancient shamanism does.
They have the courage,
and the tools,
and techniques, and the focus
to go into the darkness.
That doesn't allow fear.
There is no fear.
There is light to
gain in the darkness.
And that light has
to be retrieved.
That's a soul retrieval.
>> There hasn't been enough
medical research to make any
scientific claims regarding the
dangers of psychedelic journeys
around thousands of strangers.
But postmodern shamans
see the damaging effects
and pick up the slack where
modern health care lacks.
And the best methods seem to
be the empowerment of others
to understand and engage
with their own healing
by listening to their
own words, and therefore,
their own subconscious.
>> The client is
the expert of life--
not me.
My client is.
They only took the wrong
exit on the highway.
And I am indicating
how to go back.
But you cannot go back
by ignoring the mistakes.
You go back by going
into your mistake,
seeing how did it happen,
regression in time,
back to where you still
are good, onto the future,
and back on track.
And that's why it's so
exciting, because it works.
People may say, I'm so sad.
I'm so sad.
My mother died, and
I can't handle it.
Under the sadness is anger.
She went too soon.
She was supposed to stay here.
I'm so angry.
I'm all alone.
So, under anger is loneliness.
And then we go for
the loneliness.
And we find inner children
and probably past lives
where you have lost soul parts
that need to be retrieved.
They can go there themselves.
So, when they leave,
the side-effect
is they feel empowered,
because they did it.
Of course, I guide them.
That's my job, but
the client does it.
And that is the big difference
in the postmodern shamanism,
as I use the term, as opposed to
the shaman who travels for you.
>> By educating people about
the energetic anomalies that are
yet to be scientifically
proven, this calls them to rise
to the occasion of acknowledging
just how much we don't know.
Once this is acknowledged,
receptivity and sensitivity
to psychic phenomena
can be addressed.
This is the first
step to safeguarding
against life's shadow elements.
However, there is also the
flip side of this coin.
Those who are overly fascinated
by the world of psychedelics,
yet naive to the landscape,
are in danger of delusion,
and vulnerable to the
shadows that lurk therein.
It is believed by mystics, as
well as some psychotherapists,
that people can be hypnotized by
forces that work through them.
And it is believed that
these individuals become
driven to climb
corporate ladders
or inject themselves
into positions of power.
As ayahuasca tourism
is growing, newbies
are fascinated
with medicine work
and believe they will
be the next shaman.
Medicine worker,
Boa Cowee has seen
many accounts of this naivety
in ayahuasca communities.
>> It's kind of crazy.
In shaman, it's become
almost a dirty word in a way.
People start doing
medicine or maybe
drink ayahuasca
for the first time,
and they want to
become a shaman.
I've even met people who have
never drank ayahuasca who said,
I'm going to become a shaman.
I'm going down to Peru,
and I'm going to be that.
And drinking ayahuasca
does not make you a shaman.
Working with your
spirit helpers,
working with your people
can make you a shaman.
But it takes so it
takes a long time.
It takes five to seven
years to get to that point.
And it's diets, yes, it's
wisdom, it's learning.
But what happens is
this psychic dredging.
And when you get to that point,
you are that hollow bone.
You're that clear
person that can be there
without judgment for somebody.
And people who are just drinking
ayahuasca for the first time--
so what happens is that
people are going down there,
and they're drinking ayahuasca.
They think that they're
going to be the one that's
going to be the shaman.
But there is no
relationship-building, there's
no association,
there's no giving back.
Their ego gets
inflamed, and they
think that they're the
ones that are doing it.
And even if they
are, the medicine
will teach you that you
don't work like that.
The medicine works through you.
You are that hollow bone.
And to get to that point,
it takes a long time.
>> The "hollow bone" is a
term to represent the space
an authentic healer or
facilitator must cultivate
within themselves--
an attentive presence with
a focus on the illness
being healed rather than
the appearance it takes on.
Being a hollow bone means
to leave fear, excitement,
urgency, unnecessary judgment,
astonishment, and even
hope, out of the equation.
The healer understands
they are equivalent
to an electrical current
that closes the loop in order
for universal currents of life
to flow freely to the ones
seeking healing.
In this way, healing
is not seen as being
done from one healthy
person to a sick one.
Rather, illness is the
result of disconnection
from the flow of life.
So, the dangers of
psychedelic plants
is in their power to
connect or disconnect you,
depending on the
set and setting.
>> Set and setting is
of paramount importance.
There's nothing more important.
I have seen also people
20 years in a back ward
because they bad a trip,
which was also poorly handled
by psychiatrists.
They're given a big dose of
tranquilizers in the middle
and then put on
maintenance dosages
to make sure that the experience
will never complete itself.
And there are people who get
stuck in that in-between place.
>> Not only can the improper
use of psychedelics lead
to psychological illness,
but those who are genetically
predisposed to mental illness
find that psychedelic plants
may cause the issue to surface.
>> In our studies, we screen
out people that have any kind
of mental illness,
psychosis in the family,
first-degree relatives just to
prevent precipitation of sort
of an acute psychosis.
There are people out there--
you probably met them,
we've all met them--
who, you look at that guy,
and if you would think of them
taking a psychedelic, you
go, that person should never
take a psychedelic.
They're just not all there.
There are people with
bipolar disorder,
schizoaffective
disorders, things
like that-- shouldn't
be taking these,
because they're powerful
psychoactive drugs.
Schizophrenia typically
hits late adolescence, early
adulthood.
This is a time
when a lot of kids
are experimenting with drugs.
And I get cases from
email every once
in a while, where
someone has taken a drug
and clearly, they've
become schizophrenic.
And they go, did the
drug do this to my son?
Did the drug do
this to my daughter?
And what I say
is, probably, this
would have happened
anyway, because they're
at the right age.
And typically, stress will
produce an onset of psychosis.
>> Psychedelic plants open the
user up to far more unfiltered
information, and therefore,
is akin to sending more
electricity to a light bulb.
Those with predispositions
to mental illness
are perhaps unable to
handle the sudden influx
of new experience.
And eventually, they burn out.
Even those without
mental health issues
are at the risk of hidden
dangers of psychedelic plants.
>> Some of the unknown dangers
that psychedelics can have
for newcomers would include,
being overly excited about it,
overly excited about the
life-transforming nature of it,
having done it once, and
then wanting to do it again
and again.
And regular use like that,
overuse, is unhealthy.
And not a lot of
people talk about that
in the psychedelic
community, particularly
in like recreational settings.
They're non-addictive,
generally speaking.
So, people think that
they're always safe to use.
But there can be
moments where you've
had fun every time you've taken
them hanging out with friends,
and then all of a sudden,
you take it one time,
and you drop into a space
that you had no idea existed
and weren't prepared for.
And those can cause
mental-health crises.
And in uncontained
settings, the dangers
would be having
the police called,
or trying to
intervene unskillfully
in a situation that
may look really weird,
but isn't dangerous in itself.
There are also people who use
these medicines in unsafe ways
intentionally--
practitioners that might
not have the best intentions
either to get money from
someone or to manipulate them
emotionally, psychologically.
>> So, it only
takes about a year--
not even-- to become a brujo,
a witch, a witch doctor.
Somebody who practices
sorcery can actually
really hurt somebody just
by thinking about it.
>> "Brujo" is the Spanish
word for witch, or magician.
There are benevolent
brujas and white witches
that are basically shamans
and medicine workers.
But in some ayahuasca
circles, "brujo"
refers to a dark or
black witch, meaning
they use the same medicine
or methods as shamans,
but with deception, ill will,
and harmful intent to gain
power over others.
But how are the newcomers
to plant medicine
supposed to identify the
ulterior motives of shamans
before deciding with
whom to do ceremony?
>> I don't know if there is any
way to spot somebody that you
can say, well, this
guy is a brujo.
And I should not be here.
And you have to hang out
with them for a while
before you really know that.
One sign, I think, in
the context of Peru is
if they're putting toé, if
they're putting Brugmansia
into their brew,
that's a bad sign,
because Brugmansia
is a drug of power.
And they use it sometimes
by itself to essentially
make you very confused and
very susceptible to suggestion.
>> Toé-- is from the Brugmansia
of flowers of the Solanaceae
family, better known as
angel's trumpets, Datura,
or thorn apple.
These contain scopolamine,
which is a tropane alkaloid that
causes extreme suggestibility,
and even paralysis, which
has been used in dark circles
to convince people to give them
money, unwittingly
accept sexual advances,
or even to induce harm.
There are accounts of young
women from around the world
traveling to South
America for ayahuasca
and waking up after being
drugged and taken advantage of.
Even though these
situations are not the norm,
it is important to
know that dark magic
or deceitful
medicine work exists.
The best advice from those
deeply invested in healing
with plant medicine is
to do your homework.
Travel with friends.
And use your intuition
about the people you meet
and the situations
you fall into.
And remember that the
best dark magicians
will be the best at
disguising their intentions
and getting close under the
guise of friendship or wisdom.
But when the invisible
forces you're experiencing
seem too great to withstand,
remember that even
the most powerful
shadows are obliterated
by the smallest hint of light.
>> We are more than meets
the eye, especially--
and usually our limited sensory
world of the third dimension--
that we often, unless
we can see spirits--
there are some
individuals-- but most of us
are limited in our
five senses until we
take a psychedelic
or something happens
that opens up our perception.
But in that moment where we
might be having a difficult
time, people from the beginning
of time have found that there
are other energies that exist
that we cannot necessarily see,
but that exist nonetheless,
and that if we asked
for their help, that they
can guide us and assist us.
In some cultures, we
call them the angels.
Or it could be
Michael or Gabriel.
Or it could be even Yahshua
or Buddha in some cultures.
In the Native American,
it might be the spirit
of the bear or the elk.
>> Spirit guides,
angels, patriarchs,
and matriarchs from
timeless myths--
all of them serve
the same purpose.
Human consciousness
is free of all form,
yet becomes most powerful in
this world when it's given form
to work through.
This is how our limited
minds grasp unlimited power
and give it direction.
No matter which guides
or helpers we choose,
the importance is to acknowledge
that we, too, all of us
are capable of
directing consciousness
for harm or protection.
And psychedelic plants
amplify this innate power.
So, how is it that the
same plants can be used
for two polar opposite results?
>> I now have the
feeling that science,
current materialistic science,
no matter how sophisticated,
is naive if it does not
include these hidden dimensions
of reality.
We had years ago, a
wonderful conference where
Humphrey Osmond was present.
And he addressed this issue.
And he said, can you imagine
a discussion about a knife?
Is the knife this very
diabolical weapon,
or is it a useful tool?
And imagine that you
would have a debate where
one of these persons
who would be present
would be Chief of New York
Police who would be talking
about all the murders that were
committed in back lanes in New
York City.
And you would have
the Surgeon General
who would say, wait a minute.
With the right kind of training,
you can do fantastic things
with a knife.
And you would have
a housewife who
would be thinking
about it as a tool
to cut salami or a vegetable.
And you would have an artist
who would think about carving
beautiful things from wood.
That we would understand
that we are not
talking about the knife.
The knife is a tool that can
be used in many different ways.
And the same with psychedelics--
there are used for healing.
They are used for inducing
spiritual experiences.
But they're also used
by the military--
horrible experiments.
The CIA-- including experiments
on our own population
and in San Francisco and so on.
I have tremendous
awe and respect
for what psychedelics can
do on both sides, depending
on the set and setting,
depending how they are used.
They are powerful tools.
Aside from dark magicians
or medicine workers
using these plants as
personal power moves,
it must be noted
that psychedelics
have been used by
governments experimenting
on their own people.
In the mid-1900s, the
Central Intelligence Agency
was fascinated with
psychedelics for mind control,
as well as other wartime
tactics and began
conducting experiments on
soldiers and college students.
Then on August 16 of 1951,
the town of Pont-Saint-Esprit
was dosed with LSD.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- The CIA funded Fort
Detrick to an experiment
there involving aerosol LSD
sprayed in the small village.
That affected 500
people in that village.
There were three suicides.
And about 40 people were carted
off to a nearby insane asylum
as a result of that experiment.
[END PLAYBACK]
>> Although much of these
accounts can be frightening
to accept, by taking a
sobering look at human behavior
throughout the ages, we
shouldn't be surprised that
those with ill intentions will
seek advanced means of getting
what they wish.
So, the way forward, in a
safe and intelligent manner,
is to understand the protections
we have available to us.
The power of psychedelics
to open the mind
to new information is not
simply to make the world look
better than it is.
It's to address the
shadow side of all life.
In Buddhism, there are three
steps to truly honoring
the whole of existence.
First is right sight.
Second is right understanding.
And thirdly is right action.
Even though action is the way
to bring change into this world,
that action will
always be polluted
if you do not see the
world as it truly is.
And if you don't see it clearly,
understanding it is impossible.
Psychedelics help
achieve this goal.
They don't spoon-feed
us the answers,
but they do dismantle unhealthy
beliefs that muddy our vision.
They offer new
perspectives to worldviews.
And because of this, a
new and more relevant
understanding of the
actual world we live in
can organically assemble itself.
So, how did the
spiritual traditions
of the ancient past view and
deal with the shadow side?
>> Well, the concept of the
shadow side and the way that
you talk about it is big
in many different cultures.
I think, as it relates to yoga,
it tends to be talked about
in a kind of new-agey way,
that from my experience,
from the traditional
yoga standpoint,
I would say that the shadow
side is more this idea
of the unconscious
or the subconscious--
the idea of Samskara.
In yoga, the word "Samskara"
means a habit or a pattern.
It's like this deep,
grooved pathway
that we just tend to fall into.
The mannerisms that we
do, the way that we speak,
the emotional
habits that we have,
the things that we keep having
show up in our life over,
and over, and over
again, we're like,
how am I still in
the same thing--
that's a Samskara.
It's this it's almost like we're
being ruled by another force.
But in yoga, we would
say that we're just being
ruled by our unconscious self.
>> It might seem that if the
shadow side is merely our own
subconscious mind, then other
individuals or entities cannot
penetrate this realm and
complicate our experience.
However, it was postulated
by Carl Gustav Jung
that there is a collective,
unconscious realm
that all people share.
If this is true, the
landscape of the unconscious
would be a shared territory
that other sentient beings can
use to enter other subconscious
minds, meaning that the yoga
perspective might fit perfectly
with psychic attacks reported
by shamanic and
spiritual practitioners.
Even though there is
currently no technology
to verify the existence
of these realms,
countless people
are still imbibing
psychedelic substances,
entering the unknown,
and coming back with tales
of spirits and entities
with all kinds of motives.
University of Pennsylvania
neuroscientist Dr. Andrew
Newberg has been studying the
relationship of brain function
and states of consciousness.
He found that the parietal
lobe of the brain in Tibetan
Buddhist monks becomes
deactivated while
in meditation.
This area of the
brain is said to be
responsible for giving us
a sense of our orientation
in time and space.
So, as meditation causes this
brain region to go offline,
the sensation of leaving the
body and the suspension of time
ensues.
Dr. Newberg has called this
the "neurotheological model."
In other words, brain
function is the phenomenon
which gives rise to mystical
or religious-type experiences.
However, some believe
that mystical events
are not caused by the brain,
but simply correlated.
Symptoms in the brain are
seeing at the same time
as the experience.
So, if there are
really shadow entities
with their own
capacity to think,
or if these are just
unknown compartments
of human intelligence, what
communication mechanism
allows us to become
aware of them at all?
Ancient and shamanic cultures
may have proposed the idea
that through cycles of time
and in vibrations of matter,
these may account for all
phenomena and the unity
between our individual conscious
minds and the Universal Mind.
>> Many indigenous cultures had
an idea that the basis of all
of manifested creation is either
sound, or certain geometries,
or certain frequency
patterns-- certain numbers.
And the Mayans and the Aztecs--
they encoded this into
not only their calendar,
but in their system of how
they structure their society.
And they recognize that our
body is a set of vibrations.
Our part is pulsing, our
breath, our brain waves,
every cell of our
body is vibrating.
And then we have
all the rhythms.
And if they knew that there was
a certain set of frequencies
that were the fabric, that just
these certain notes or numbers
were what we encoded into
our system of culture, then
we would be in harmony
with the cosmos.
They would even use
breathing practices,
along with meditation
and intention,
to align themselves
with these patterns.
And from this,
they would achieve
altered or expanded states.
This is where yogis, just like
other shamanic traditions,
actually start to use sound.
So, there's an understanding
that sound is vibration
and that vibration is at
the essence of everything.
And usually, our awareness
is caught in all this noise
and sound of the outside world.
So, as we sit, we breathe, we
start to draw awareness in,
and then we focus the
awareness on something--
one-pointed concentration.
So, we work with quieting the
mind, withdrawing the senses,
and merging with and resting
in this place of awareness that
is beyond just the ups and downs
of the mind and the emotion.
And while both are real--
because your mind still exists,
your emotions still exist,
they're never going to go away--
we just start to
step away from that
that's our only identification.
>> There are some that say
identifying with darkness
and shadow is the way we
hand over power to it.
But the traditional
practices that
have survived thousands
of years acknowledge
that the shadow side
is a phenomena that
will never go away.
It's merely the way
that light works
in a world of objects and form.
Day fades to night, and
light goes into hiding.
The daily activity
falls into sleep.
And waking consciousness
goes dormant.
Light touches a leaf
and casts a shadow.
These are natural and
beautiful phenomena.
And when all is said and
done, the dark aspects of life
are our greatest teachers.
The sages and adepts
of times long ago,
as well as wise gurus
and savants today,
have only one thing
to say when they
peek behind the veil
of their own mind
and see the darkness
of the world.
Thank you.
Thank you for calling
attention to my blindness
and giving me the
gift of right sight
so that I may rightly understand
what lurks in the shadows
and act in love and
protection of all life.
Up next, join us
as we shed light
on the expanded states of
consciousness in the dream
state and what this can teach us
about psychedelic experiences.